Nodes and clients Merge update (#7133)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/run-a-node/index.md

Running your own node provides you various benefits, opens new possibilities, and helps to support the ecosystem. This page will guide you through spinning up your own node and taking part in validating Ethereum transactions.

> Note that after [The Merge](/upgrades/merge), two clients are required to run an Ethereum node. These are an execution client and a consensus client. This page will show how to install, configure and connect these two clients to form an Ethereum node.

Reviewer: Same as before, would use execution/consensus _layer_ clients so we can use EL/CL as acronyms.

> Note that after [The Merge](/upgrades/merge), two clients are required to run an Ethereum node. These are an execution client and a consensus client. This page will show how to install, configure and connect these two clients to form an Ethereum node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that after [The Merge](/upgrades/merge), two clients are required to run an Ethereum node; an **execution layer (EL)** client and a **consensus layer (CL)** client. This page will show how to install, configure and connect these two clients to run an Ethereum node.
```

You need to declare any client settings that aren't default at the start. You can use flags or the config file to declare your preferred configuration. Set of features and config syntax of each client differs. Check out your client's documentation for the specifics.

Execution and consensus clients communicate via an authenticated endpoint specified in [Engine API](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-apis/tree/main/src/engine). In order to connect to a consensus client, the execution client must generate a [`jwtsecret`](https://jwt.io/) at a known path. For security and stability reasons, clients should run on the same machine, and both clients must know this path as it is used to authenticate a local RPC connection between them. The execution client must also define a listening port for authenticated APIs.

This token is generated automatically by the client software, but in some cases, e.g. during pre-Merge testing, you might need to do it yourself. You can generate it by running:

```
openssl rand -hex 32 > jwtsecret
```

> **Note that it is recommended to connect an execution and consensus client on a testnet only for now (e.g. Kiln) and await merge-ready client releases before replicating the process on Mainnet.**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note that it is recommended to connect an execution and consensus client on a testnet only for now (e.g. Kiln, Ropsten, Sepolia, Görli) and await merge-ready client releases before replicating the process on Mainnet.**
```
Probably worth calling out the other testnets here.

```
besu --network=mainnet \
    --data-path=/data/ethereum \
    --rpc-http-enabled=true \
    --engine-rpc-enabled=true \
    --engine-host-allowlist="*" \
    --engine-jwt-enabled=true \
    --engine-jwt-secret=/path/to/jwtsecret
```

Besu also comes with a launcher option which will ask a series of questions and generate the config file. Run the interactive launcher using:

```
besu --Xlauncher
```

Besu's [documentation](https://besu.hyperledger.org/en/latest/HowTo/Get-Started/Starting-node/) contains additional options and configuration details.

##### Running Erigon

This example starts Erigon on mainnet, stores blockchain data at `/data/ethereum`, enables JSON RPC, defines which namespaces are allowed and enables authentication for connecting the consensus client which is defined by the `jwtsecret` path.

```
erigon --chain mainnet \
    --datadir /data/ethereum  \
    --http --http.api=engine,eth,web3,net \
    --authrpc.jwtsecret=/path/to/jwtsecret
```

> Erigon by default perfoor 8GB with HDD rms a full sync which will result in more than 2TB of archive data. Make sure `datadir` is pointing to disk with enough free space or look into `--prune` flag which can trim different kinds of data. Check the Erigon's `--help` to learn more.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Erigon by default performs a full sync with 8GB HDD which will result in more than 2TB of archive data. Make sure `datadir` is pointing to disk with enough free space or look into `--prune` flag which can trim different kinds of data. Check the Erigon's `--help` to learn more.
```

This confuses me, I think this is the intent

##### Running Geth

This example starts Geth on mainnet, stores blockchain data at `/data/ethereum`, enables JSON RPC and defines which namespaces are allowed. It also enables authentication for connecting consensus client which requires path to `jwtsecret` and also option defining which connections are allowed, in our example only from `localhost`.

```
geth --mainnet \
    --datadir "/data/ethereum" \
    --http --http.api="eth,web3,net" \
    --authrpc.vhosts="localhost" \
    --authrpc.jwtsecret=/path/to/jwtsecret
```

Check [docs for all configuration options](https://geth.ethereum.org/docs/interface/command-line-options) and learn more about [running Geth with a consensus client](https://geth.ethereum.org/docs/interface/consensus-clients).

##### Running Nethermind

> Nethermind offers various [installation options](https://docs.nethermind.io/nethermind/first-steps-with-nethermind/getting-started). The package come with various binaries, including a Launcher with guided setup, which will help you to create the configuration interactively. Alternativally, you find Runner which is the executable itself and you can just run it with config glags. JSON RPC is enabled by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Nethermind offers various [installation options](https://docs.nethermind.io/nethermind/first-steps-with-nethermind/getting-started). The package comes with various binaries, including a Launcher with a guided setup, which will help you to create the configuration interactively. Alternatively, you find Runner which is the executable itself and you can just run it with config flags. JSON RPC is enabled by default.
```

Some spelling fixes

#### Starting the consensus client {#starting-the-consensus-client}

The consensus client must be started with the right port configuration to establish a local RPC connection to the execution client. The consensus clients have to be run with the exposed execution client port as configuration argument.

The consensus client also needs the path to the execution client's `jwt-secret` in order to authenticate the RPC connection between them. Similar to execution examples above, each consensus client has a configuration flag which takes the jwt token file path as an argument. This must be consistent with the `jwtsecret` path provided to the execution client.

If you plan to run a validator, make sure to add a configuration flag which specifies Ethereum address of the fee recipient. This is where ether rewards for your validator accumulates. Each consensus client has an option e.g. `--suggested-fee-recipient=0xabcd1` that takes an Ethereum address as an argument.

> **Note that we recommend waiting for merge-ready client releases before doing this on Ethereum Mainnet—for now just practice on a testnet such as Kiln or Goerli**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note that we recommend waiting for merge-ready client releases before doing this on Ethereum Mainnet—for now just practice on a testnet such as Kiln, Ropsten, Sepolia or Goerli**
```

Just adding other networks

> When starting Beacon Node on testnet, you can save significantly save syncing time by using public endpoint for [Checkpoint sync](https://notes.ethereum.org/@launchpad/checkpoint-sync).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When starting Beacon Node on testnet, you can significantly save syncing time by using public endpoint for [Checkpoint sync](https://notes.ethereum.org/@launchpad/checkpoint-sync).
```
Extra save

- Specifies network to connect to, mainnet in our examples
  - You can instead choose [one of testnets](/developers/docs/networks/) for prelimenary testing of your setup
- Defines data directory, where all the data including blockchain will be stored
  - Make sure to subsitute the path with a real one, e.g. pointing to your external drive
- Enables interfaces for communicating with the client
  - Including JSON RPC and Engine API for communication with consensus client
- Defines path to `jwtsecret` for authenticated API
  - Make sure to substitute the example path with a real one which can be accessed by clients, e.g. `/tmp/jwtsecret`

Please keep in mind that this is just a basic example, all other settings will be set to default. Pay attention to the documentation of each client to learn about default values, settings, and features. For more features, for example for running validators, monitoring, etc., please refer to the documentation of the specific client.

> Note that backslashes `\` in examples are only for formatting purposes; config flags can be defined in a single line.

<details>

>   <summary>Running Besu</summary>

Author: Yes, let's change it

To simplify, let's think about running a node on both a local physical machine and a cloud server:

- Cloud
  - Providers offer high server uptime and static public IP addresses
  - Getting dedicated or virtual server can be more comfortable than building your own
  - Trade off is trusting a third party - server provider
  - Because of the required storage size for full node, the price of a rented server might get high
- Own hardware
  - More trustless and sovereign approach
  - One time investment
  - An option to buy preconfigured machines
  - You have to physically prepare, maintain, and potentially troubleshoot the machine and networking

Both options have different advantages summed up above. If you are looking for a cloud solution, in addition to many traditional cloud computing providers, there are also services focused on deploying nodes. For example:

- [QuikNode](https://www.quiknode.io/)
- [Blockdaemon](https://blockdaemon.com)
- [Alchemy](https://www.alchemy.com/)

Check out also [nodes as a service](/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/nodes-as-a-service/) for more options on hosted nodes. 

#### Hardware {#hardware}

> However, a censorship-resistant, decentralized network should not rely on cloud providers. It's healthier for the ecosystem if you run your own node on your local hardware. [Estimations](https://www.ethernodes.org/networkType/Hosting) show around 40-60% of nodes is running on cloud which could become a single point of failure. 

Reviewer: remove specific %s so you don't need to update this over and over :-) 

```suggestion
However, a censorship-resistant, decentralized network should not rely on cloud providers. It's healthier for the ecosystem if you run your own node on your local hardware. [Estimations](https://www.ethernodes.org/networkType/Hosting) show a large share of nodes are running on cloud, which could become a single point of failure. 
```

> Depending on your needs and wants, Ethereum clients can run on your computer, laptop, server or single-board computer. Even if it's possible to run clients on your personal computer, having a dedicated machine just for your node can greatly enhance its performance and security while minimizing the impact on your primary computer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on your needs and wants, Ethereum clients can run on your computer, laptop, server or single-board computer. While it is possible to run clients on your personal computer, having a dedicated machine just for your node can greatly enhance its performance and security while minimizing the impact on your primary computer.
```

> Using your own hardware can be very easy and escalates from simple to more advanced options. Let's look into the requirements and means for running Ethereum clients on your own machine. 

Reviewer: > escalates from simple to more advanced options.

Not sure what you mean by this?

Author: Right, it should say something like 
"spectrum of options (ways of running node) ranges from simple to more advanced ones"

#### Requirements {#requirements}

Hardware requirements differ by client but generally are not that high since the node just needs to stay synced. Don't confuse it with mining, which requires much more computing power. Sync time and performance do improve with more powerful hardware however. 

Before installing any client, please ensure your computer has enough resources to run it. Minimum and recommended requirements can be found below. 

> The hardware bottleneck is mostly a disk. Syncing the Ethereum blockchain is very input/output intensive and requires a lot of space. It is best to have a solid-state drive (SSD) with hundreds of GBs of free space to spare even after the synchronization. To run an Ethereum client on an HDD, you will need at least 8GB of RAM to use as a cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The hardware bottleneck is mostly a disk space. Syncing the Ethereum blockchain is very input/output intensive and requires a lot of space. It is best to have a solid-state drive (SSD) with hundreds of GBs of free space to spare even after the synchronization. To run an Ethereum client on an HDD, you will need at least 8GB of RAM to use as a cache.
```

Size of the database and speed of the initial synchronization depends on chosen client, its configuration and [sync strategy](/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/#sync-modes). 

Also make sure your internet connection is not limited by a [bandwidth cap](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_cap). It's recommended to use an unmetered connection since initial sync and data broadcasted to the network could exceed your limit.

##### Operating system {#operating-system}

All clients support major operating systems - Linux, MacOS, Windows. This means you can run nodes on regular desktop or server machines with the operating system (OS) that suits you the best. Make sure your OS is up to date to avoid potential issues and security vulnerabilities.

##### Minimum requirements {#recommended-specifications}

- CPU with 2+ cores

> - 4 GB RAM or 8GB with HDD 

Reviewer: Is this true post-merge? Seems low?

Author: Yeah it should be at least 8GB RAM. And I would remove the HDD references, I think should not recommend that

- 500GB disk space, SSD prefered 
- 8 MBit/s bandwidth

##### Recommended specifications {#recommended-hardware}

- Fast CPU with 4+ cores
- 16 GB+ RAM
- Fast SSD with 1+TB
- 25+ MBit/s bandwidth

The sync mode and client you choose will affect space requirements but we've estimated the disk space you'll need for each client below. 

| Client       | Disk size (snap sync) | Disk size (full archive) |
| ------------ | --------------------- | ------------------------ |
| Geth         | 400GB+                | 11TB+                    |
| Nethermind   | 400GB+                | 11TB+                    |
| Besu         | 800GB+                | 11TB+                    |
| Erigon       | N/A                   | 2.5TB+                   |

> - Note: Erigon does not Fast Sync, but Full Pruning is possible (~500GB)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Note: Erigon does not offer snap sync, but Full Pruning is possible (~500GB)
```

First, you need to obtain your preferred [execution client](/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/#execution-clients) and [consensus client](developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/#consensus-clients) software. 

You can simply download an executable application or installation package that suits your operating system and architecture. Always verify the signatures and checksums of downloaded packages. Some clients also offer repositories or Docker images for easier installation and updates.All of the clients are open source, so you can also build them from source. This is a more advanced method, but in some cases, it might be required. 

Instructions for installing each client are provided in the documentation linked in the client lists above. 

Here are the release pages of clients where you can find their pre-built binaries or instructions on installation: 

##### Execution clients

- [Geth](https://geth.ethereum.org/downloads/)
- [Nethermind](https://downloads.nethermind.io/)
- [Besu](https://github.com/hyperledger/besu/releases)
- [Erigon](https://github.com/ledgerwatch/erigon#usage) (Doesn't provide a pre-built binary, has to be compiled)

> It is also worth noting that client diversity is an [issue on the execution layer](https://clientdiversity.org/),

Reviewer: Perhaps link the full client diversity page instead?

with Geth being run on a supermajority (>66%) of all Ethereum nodes. It is recommended that readers on this page consider running a minority execution client.

##### Consensus clients

- [Lighthouse](https://github.com/sigp/lighthouse/releases/latest)
- [Teku](https://github.com/ConsenSys/teku/releases)
- [Nimbus](https://github.com/status-im/nimbus-eth2/releases/latest)
- [Prysm](https://github.com/prysmaticlabs/prysm/releases/latest)
- [Lodestar](https://chainsafe.github.io/lodestar/install/source/) (Doesn't provide a pre-built binary, only a Docker image or to be build from source)

> There is currently a [client diversity](/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/client-diversity/) issue where a large dominance of Prysm clients poses a risk to the health of the network. In response to the initial drive to even out the client diversity many Prysm nodes switched to Lighthouse to the extent that it now also has a problematic market share. It is therefore recommended to consider choosing a minority client. 

Reviewer: I would avoid mentioning specific client too much for this info to not get out of date. Can point people towards the data and say "use a minority client" :-)

Author: This as added by eth.org team and I wanted to keep it as it is still up to date but I agree with the change to minimize needed updates

[See the latest network client usage](https://clientdiversity.org/) and learn more about [client diversity](/developers/docs/client-diversity). 

##### Verifying the software {#verifying-software}

When downloading software from the internet, it's recommended to verify its integrity. This step is optional but especially with crucial infrastracture piece like the Ethereum client, it's important to be aware of potential attack vectors and avoid them. If you just downloaded a pre-built binary, you need to trust it and risk that an attacker could swap the executable for a malicious one. 

> DDevelopers sign released binaries with their PGP keys so you can cryptographically verify you are running exactly the software they created. You just need to obtain public keys used by developers, which can be found on client release pages or in documentation. After downloading the client release and its signature, you can use a PGP implementation, e.g. [GnuPG](https://gnupg.org/download/index.html) to easily verify them. Check out a tutorial on veryifing open-source software using `gpg` on [linux](https://www.tecmint.com/verify-pgp-signature-downloaded-software/) or [Windows/MacOS](https://freedom.press/training/verifying-open-source-software/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers sign released binaries with their PGP keys so you can cryptographically verify you are running exactly the software they created. You just need to obtain public keys used by developers, which can be found on client release pages or in documentation. After downloading the client release and its signature, you can use a PGP implementation, e.g. [GnuPG](https://gnupg.org/download/index.html) to easily verify them. Check out a tutorial on veryifing open-source software using `gpg` on [linux](https://www.tecmint.com/verify-pgp-signature-downloaded-software/) or [Windows/MacOS](https://freedom.press/training/verifying-open-source-software/). 
```
